# SPXP compared to other protocols
Multiple other protocols have been proposed for decentralised social networks. It is worth comparing SPXP against a selection
of popular alternatives, investigate the differences and discuss why these do not fulfil the design goals we are looking for
with SPXP:
* individual sovereignty
* privacy
* security
* simplicity

To see how SPXP addresses these requirements, see [here](./SPXP-in-a-nutshell.md). There is a list of challenges and features
NOT supported by SPXP at the bottom of this page.

### ActivityPub (gnuscial, Mastodon, Pleroma, Pixelfed, etc)
[ActivityPub](https://www.w3.org/TR/2018/REC-activitypub-20180123/) uses a federated architecture. Users can freely chose their
"home instance" from multiple available instance. To participate, the user needs to create an account on this home instance. It
is possible to communicate with users beyond the home instance via federation. Data, like profile information or individual posts,
is replicated as needed between instances.
* Your ID is bound to the domain of your home instance
* You don't have full control over your own profile  
  Instance owners can close and delete your profile at any time and at their sole discretion - and sometimes even close the entire instance.
  All your data and connections will be lost, at least until your last manual backup. Profile migrations are an afterthought and only possible
  if the instance owner collaborates.  
  This is a violation of the *individual sovereignty* we are interested in.
* You don't have full control over your own timeline  
  Instance owners block content from other instances at their sole discretion. Accounts on blocked instances will not be able to interact
  with you and you won't even see their content. This content moderation has some positive impacts, e.g. for blocking spam and fighting harassment.  
  However, since you don't have control over this content moderation, it is a violation of the *individual sovereignty* we are interested in.
* The authenticity of your data is not guaranteed  
  Without real end-to-end digital signatures, it is possible to tamper with existing messages or completely forge them.  
  This is a violation of the *security* we are interested in.
* Your data is fully accessible by instance owners  
  This includes absolutely everything and is a severe violation of the *privacy* we are interested in.
* You cannot control how your content is used  
  As a federated protocol, it requires your data to be replicated between different instances. This also happens outside of your control, e.g. if
  someone "boosts" (re-tweets) your post. Other instances in the Fediverse will display your content on their website, under their own terms and
  under their exclusive control.  
  This is a violation of the *individual sovereignty* we are interested in.
* You cannot limit the visibility of your content  
  There is some content you are happy to share with the whole world. But there might be other content you only want to share with your
  friends or your family. This is not supported in ActivityPub. Everything is publicly visible (except DMs).  
  This does not provide the level of *privacy* and *security* we are interested in.

Many of these aspects are caused by the federated architecture. Real privacy can only be guaranteed by end-to-end encryption. But without
being able to understand the content, the instance would not be able to organise the content for you.

### AT Protocol (Bluesky)
The [Authenticated Transfer Protocol](https://atproto.com/docs) is very similar to ActivityPub. It is using a federated architecture consisting
of Personal Data Servers (PDS). Just like ActivityPub, users freely chose their PDS and create an account. Although there are technical
differences, we see very similar findings in regards to the design goals we are looking for:
* The handle is bound to a DNS domain
* Although your profile is defined by a DID document, you cannot easily transfer your handle to a new PDS
* You don't have full control over your own profile  
  Just as in ActivityPub, an PDS owner can decide to close your profile or the entire service at any time.  
  This is a violation of the *individual sovereignty* we are interested in.  
* You don't have full control over your own timeline  
  Just as in ActivityPub, your personal feed is generated by your PDS.  
  This is a violation of the *individual sovereignty* we are interested in.  
* Individual information pieces are not digitally signed  
  There is a mechanism to digitally sign the entire profile as a whole, but not for individual messages.
* Personal Data Servers (PDS) owners have access to all your data (there is no end-to-end message encryption)  
  This includes absolutely everything and is a severe violation of the *privacy* we are interested in.
* You can probably not control how your content is used  
  At this point, there is only one instance of a PDS. How federation between different PDS is going to work is not yet fully clear. As a federated
  protocol, it is very likely that it will have similar characteristics as ActivityPub.
  This is a violation of the *individual sovereignty* we are interested in.
* You cannot limit the visibility of your content  
  This does not provide the level of *privacy* and *security* we are interested in.

The AT protocol is pretty new and is [currently seeing a lot of changes](https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto/commits/main). It is
possible that the above analysis is no longer accurate. We will try to keep up with the recent developments and update this section accordingly.

However, as a federated architecture, it suffers from the same generic problem: Real privacy can only be guaranteed by end-to-end encryption,
which prevents the PDS from managing the profile for you.

### Nostr
[Nostr (Notes and Other Stuff Transmitted by Relays)](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nostr) is an interesting candidate. It solves many
of our requirements in a quite similar manner. However, it only provides public posts and does not go as far as SPXP in terms for privacy
and sovereignty matters:
* Profiles are bound to a cryptographic keypair owned by the user, making them portable
* Information is published through relays  
  You can freely chose an arbitrary set of relays to publish. Other users will receive your updates as long as they listen to at least
  one of the relays you are publishing on.
* Events are end-to-end signed, guaranteeing message authenticity
* All messages are public, except for direct messages  
  This does not provide the level of *privacy* and *security* we are interested in.
* You cannot limit the visibility of your content  
  This does not provide the level of *privacy* and *security* we are interested in.
* Relays know too much information about you  
  This not just (obviously) includes public messages, but also metadata of private messages, all profiles you are following and all
  discussion threads you are reading (via filter conditions).  
  This does not provide the level of *privacy* we are interested in.
* No guaranteed event durability  
  Relays can chose to keep events only for a given period of time

In a nutshell: Nostr is inherently open and public (everybody can read messages, everybody can reply to all your posts) while SPXP focuses
on privacy and sovereignty (fine grained control over the audience, end to end encryption, full control over replies to your posts).


## Challenges and requirements for SPXP

By radically pushing power and control from the network into endpoint devices, we face a hard requirement to support this protocol:  
You need a fat client to fully participate.

It is possible to read and display public content with a very simple client. In order to fully participate with your own profile in
connections, to read private encrypted posts and to contribute with comments to other profiles, the client needs to implement a fair
amount of logic.

With ActivityPub, a simple web browser is laready sufficient. This does not work with SPXP.

## Common features not (yet) provided by SPXP

There are a couple of features commonly provided by social networks which are not available in SPXP:

**Sharing / Re-tweet / Boost**  
It is quite common in popular social networks to re-post an existing message on your own account. With digitally signed posts, SPXP
could even provide fully authenticated re-posts by including the entire original message.  
However, we have not yet made a final decision wether this feature has more good or bad implications. It might be added at a later time.

**Publishing replies on your own feed**  
In other social networks, it is quite common that your followers can see your replies to other posts on your profile. With SPXP, we
made the deliberate choice that the entire discussion on a post is "owned" by the author of the original post. It is possible, and quite
common, that these replies will be encrypted and only visible to a limited audience.  
If you follow both profiles, you will be able to see these replies and your client can notify you accordingly.

**At mentions**  
When you mention another profile in a post message, it is a quite common feature that the mentioned profile gets informed. At this point,
we decided decided against this feature to prevent spam. There are already some ideas how we could give profile owners better control
over being mentioned.